## OpenAI Gym Video Game Agents

##### This project was the semester exam project. Students had about 15 hours of work time on their projects and worked individually, although they were welcome to collaborate as they worked on different projects.

---

The OpenAI Gym offers a variety of environments for training and testing artificial intelligence programs. The 2018 exam consists of designing and building an AI player for an OpenAI Gym environment of the student’s choice. The project submission must include source code, a written report, and at least one extension of their choice. Students will prepare to build their player by creating a player for the Cartpole environment in class; therefore, no students should submit a Cartpole player. Students are encouraged to choose an environment by considering the following factors:

- Number of previous submissions - could you create something novel? Do you want the support of specific examples tutorials?
- Input complexity - how long do you expect your algorithm to train? Is your schedule elastic enough for that time frame?
- Model complexity - do you want to delve into the math behind algorithms and write code on the matrix multiplication level? Would you rather explore more complicated models and apply them using existing libraries?

Programming, particularly in the area of AI, relies on building on the work of others. Although this exam is an individual project, students may collaborate with anyone they like, either in the class or outside of it. Collaboration includes reading research and tutorials, discussing design choices, sharing source code, interpreting results, and troubleshooting problems. All collaboration must be documented clearly and must be guided by informed use of intellectual property.

The written report must describe the student’s decision making process around each step of building their player. The training technique(s) they used should be explained in sufficient detail that a classmate could read and understand the technique(s). The results should be reported clearly and given context through comparisons and discussion around the cause of the results, any trends, and anything surprising. Each student’s written report must be written entirely by the student, however, students are welcome to cite research, discuss the content of the report with anyone, and receive feedback on drafts from anyone. The written report should be as long as is needed to document all information clearly and concisely, which will likely take between one and two pages, single spaced, excluding figures or images.

Students must submit one extension of their choice. This extension is designed to provide an opportunity to grow in an area of interest while respecting the busy exam schedule. Students may choose to submit additional materials for extra credit. Some examples of extensions include a project page for the online class gallery, rendered videos of their player in action, a published tutorial to help other programmers implement their player, a presentation, or a link to their submission to the OpenAI leaderboard. Other extensions are welcomed and should be discussed with Ms. Pries. Students may work together on an extension with significant additional effort required (such as a robotic implementation of their player or presenting at a public meetup) and should discuss their ideas with Ms. Pries in advance.

The project - including source code, written report, and any extensions - is due at the start of the exam block, as scheduled by the school. Source code must be submitted using GitHub and include all commits and documentation in-line or in a readme, including instructions for running the program. The written report must be submitted as a PDF or shared Google Doc via Schoology. Extension submission instructions will depend on the format of the extension.

Grading for the exam will be guided by the following rubric (note: please pardon the GitHub formatting limitations):

. | Ideal | Solid | Needs Work
--- | --- | --- | ---
Effort and Classmate Support (15) | The student challenges themselves with realistic goal setting, planning ahead to make the best use of their time, and accountability to a half course workload. The student reflects on their work and uses that information to optimize for their own learning, including learning organization and project management skills. The student enhances the class’ understanding of the material by sharing resources, asking questions, and actively seeking to support other students both in class and outside of class. | The student creates a plan and largely follows it throughout the project, but does not incorporate changes from self-reflection. The student helps other students when asked in class or serves as a sounding board for other students to try out ideas. The student asks questions as a last resort. | The student does not document effort that is consistent or fully planned. The student does not strategize their time to maximize learning.
Problem Approach (10) | The student chooses an environment that aligns with their interests and pushes them to the next level of learning. The student discusses their decision in their report, including specific information about what drove their decision. The student clearly explains their approach to their chosen environment, including but not limited to decisions around preprocessing input, selecting reward metric, definition of success, etc. | The student tries an environment that interests them, but does not factor in the logistical concerns needed to plan a project that maximizes learning. The student follows existing decisions surrounding their approach to their chosen environment, as described. | The student chooses an environment that seems easy to them, missing an opportunity for growth. The student uses input from the environment “as is,” or does not describe their decisions surrounding it.
Learning Implementation (25) | The student tries multiple strategies for learning, including strategies that had not been discussed in class. The student clearly describes the appropriateness of their strategy. The student designs their implementation in a way that attempts to optimize performance, including addressing memory and computational concerns.The student uses an effective combination of existing resources and original code. | The student builds on an existing strategy to generate original discussion in the broader OpenAI context. The student explores the use of best practices to address performance concerns. The student relies heavily on modified tutorial code with small changes in training or testing. | The student re-implements a strategy that has been used within their environment without presenting an original take. The student’s implementation is unnecessarily computationally intensive. The student writes minimal original code.
Interpretation of Results (20) | The student designs and implements a clear path for collecting and comparing results, including information on both player success and algorithm computational performance. The student clearly reports and contextualizes the findings that are interesting to them, such as absolute player success, rapid player learning, or optimized computational performance. The student compares their performance between multiple of their implementations or to existing implementations, if possible. The student clearly describes how their results informed an iterative process to modify their learning techniques. | The student does not automate or provide a clear path for testing their player, but is able to report statistics through manual calculation. The student reports statistical information about the player’s performance, but does not provide meaningful context around the report. The student uses their results to quantify satisfaction, but does not describe how their results informed decisions to modify their technique. | The student is unable to determine the effectiveness of their player. The student does not report statistical information about the player’s performance. The student does not use their results to modify their technique.
Report (15) | The student’s written report clearly documents their approach, strategy, and results. The project is contextualized in relation to existing work, highlights what makes their project original, and may point to proposed next steps. The student uses an effective combination of written text, charts, graphs, images, code snippets, or other tools to convey their meaning in a way that is accessible and engaging. | The student’s written report clearly documents their approach, strategy, and results, but does not fully contextualize the unique aspects of their project. The report relies solely on written text or directly reporting results without enough context or discussion for a reader to interpret the results meaningfully. | The student’s written report does not clearly document their approach, strategy, and results. The report is too short or too long to provide enough discussion for the reader to understand the project.
Extensions (15+) | The student submits one or more extensions and clearly explain how the extensions deepen their understanding of the material, broaden their set of tools, or enhance their report to make their work more accessible. Students who submit more than one extension may receive extra credit for their work, as deemed by Ms. Pries, based on the goals above and the effort associated. | The student submits one or more extensions without enough explanation (for example, a video without commentary of the contents). If a student completes one contextualized extension and starts additional work, they are encouraged to submit their work, even if it is incomplete. | The student does not submit an extension. 

